---
inFeed: true
hasPage: false
inNav: false
isBasedOnUrl: 'http://www.dedaders.nl/oudesite/rec-flus-parool_en.htm'
inLanguage: null
starred: true
keywords: []
description: 'home nederlands back Article - Parool, Saturday 12 May 2001 Preview of premiere Flus by De Daders / Jan Langedijk By Pieter Bots  THE MEANING OF SMACKING AND KI'
datePublished: '2016-02-26T20:11:02.489Z'
dateModified: '2016-02-26T20:07:54.691Z'
author: []
title: ''
authors: []
publisher:
  name: dedaders.nl
  domain: www.dedaders.nl
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-02-26-home-nederlands-back-article-parool-saturday-12-may-2001.md
published: true
_context: 'http://schema.org'
_type: Article

---
home nederlands back Article - Parool, Saturday 12 May 2001 Preview of premiere Flus by De Daders / Jan Langedijk By Pieter Bots THE MEANING OF SMACKING AND KISSING Jan Langedijk, the front man of the mime company De Daders, loves everyday behaviour. And also objects. In Flus, four technicians make use of an untold number of props to record their sounds for a radio-play.     Anyone who has just seen a performance by De Daders, will look differently at his own actions. You are aware of every movement that you make. Why am I putting this cup of coffee down here, and not there? Hey, why has that bunch of keys now fallen on the ground? Did I throw it onto the table too forcefully? You are amazed by everyday actions.     For years, Jan Langedijk's theatre company has created performances that conjure up such seemingly trivial, but equally fundamental questions. Sela (aire), Sur place, the titles of his mime productions are often puzzling and one by one, they are meticulous studies of seemingly insignificant actions.     "I am enormously intrigued by human behaviour", Jan Langedijk confessed on the eve of his new performance, Flus. "Everyday activities unconsciously performed can sometimes say more about someone's character than great events in life.     The way in which, for example, you tidy up your desk, illustrates how things are ordered in your mind. Every action, however banal it may seem, has a choice at its foundation. Such matters lend themselves well to a theatrical performance, for through them you can show how someone decides, or does not decide, to do something."     The actors, meanwhile, furnish a house, move vases endlessly, water jugs, biscuit tins and dishcloths, assemble chairs in a woodwork room or patch the inner tubes of bicycles. Mostly they are industrious artisans who are wholly absorbed in their work, though they are repeatedly confronted with the self-will of the objects with which they are working.     Sometimes all of this activity degenerates into slapstick of the highest quality, at other moments they stumble upon essential questions concerning the recalcitrant nature of things or the surprising behaviour of people. Jan Langedijk considers his newest performance Flus, which means both 'later' and 'a little while ago' according to the Van Dale dictionary, to be a study of memory. "I wanted to create a performance in which image and sound are staggered in relation to one another. Thus you play with the short-term memory of the observers. What they hear is derived from an action that has already taken place earlier." But first and foremost, Flus is once again a subtle encounter between four performers and an untold number of objects.     Three actors (including Jan Langedijk himself) and a musician/technician are occupied as radio-play property men in a sound studio. They record the sounds of diverse props for various short scenes. Ultimately, all of the recorded sound scenes form a radio-play, which is to be heard after the performance has finished. The sounds are played back in a different order and sometimes they acquire an entirely different meaning.     Jan Langedijk recounts that a considerable portion of the rehearsal period was filled with trying out different sounds. When Langedijk ate a mango, the smacking of his lips had to produce a sound that resembled kissing. That's why he had noisily consumed various other fruits earlier to see if they too could produce a suitable sound.     Langedijk: "Every sound that we use has to be imbued with a clear meaning. And at the same time, the observer has to be able to associate it with the object that is used during the recording. That was the great problem that we had to resolve with this performance. We discovered that image and sound form two completely separate worlds. Some objects appear unable to produce any pregnant sounds at all."     "Initially, for a fight scene I tied two shoes to my laces, by which means I wanted to imitate the sound of two men fighting. However, that produced an entirely indeterminable stamping, which the audience could make nothing of. That is why we now perform with shoes on our hands. In this way we generate little sound, but it is clear to the observer what it means.     A key role is played in Flus by advanced electronic equipment for interactive sound manipulation, which has been programmed for months. This records all sounds, replays them and ensures that in the closing scene the separate sounds can be heard in the correct order. But it can also register a sound exactly and allow it to be substituted for another. Thus in a certain scene, when Jan Langedijk moves an object or takes a step or produces another sound, the crumpling of a wad is repeatedly heard.     How complicated it is to perform all of these different sounds 'live' was clear from a rehearsal two days before the first try out. After repeated attempts, a wine bottle did not produce the desired 'plop', whereafter Jan Langedijk finally imitated the required sound with his finger in a bottle.     "Of course it is much easier if we record all of these sounds in advance and then just act out a pretence. But still I attach a great deal of value to the fact that all of the sounds in the closing radio-play have actually been recorded that evening. Flus exists by the grace of great precision. We have to ensure that we keep the objects at the correct distance from the microphone and also avoid every other sound. That concentration is to be seen again unmistakeably in our performance. The observer must also be able to feel the sensation: this is recorded in front of a live studio audience." Pieter Bots home nederlands back